---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/league-of-lore/world-history-public/6000-5000-bn/"}
---

# (6000-5000 BN)

- in 6000 BN Mortals from the far east (Beyond the map of the known world) expand across the south of the known world, establishing new civilizations. Among them are [[league of lore/world locations/ixtal\|ixtal]], [[Buhru\|Buhru]], [[Helia\|Helia]], [[Kalduga\|Kalduga]], [[Kahleek\|Kahleek]], [[DM/world_building/places/icathia\|icathia]], [[Faraj\|Faraj]] and the Ascetics of [[league of lore/world locations/targon\|targon]]. Most of these nations are on the southern continent, which they call “[[league of lore/world locations/Shurima\|league of lore/world locations/Shurima]]”.
- The Helians encounter Maokai, and promise to preserve nature as they build their civilization. Maokai gives them his blessing and they follow through, building a scholarly society that would endure for thousands of years.
-  The city of [[Oshra Va’Zaun\|Oshra Va’Zaun]] is built. Janna is particularly revered here.
-  [[league of lore/important historical figures/Vel’Koz\|league of lore/important historical figures/Vel’Koz]] becomes known to the people of Shurima as a demon from the underworld that steals the dreams of wise men. In this time knowledge of the Void is limited, so [[Vel'Koz's\|Vel'Koz's]] true nature is unknown to them.
- The mortal civilizations of the [[diaspora\|diaspora]] become aware of the [[league of lore/world races/brackern\|league of lore/world races/brackern]], but the brackern are distrustful.
- At some point the brackern decide to nope out of mortal conflicts and hibernate, figuring they’ll outlive the mortals constant warring. The timeframe for this is unknown, but as we currently don’t know of any ancient Shuriman Empire history concerning the brackern, it’s likely it was before or during the early days of the Shuriman Empire.
-  Aurelion Sol is tricked by the Aspects in to coming to Runeterra fully, and their mortal aides from Targon gift him both his name and a crown of stars. The crown allows the Aspects to steal knowledge of Runeterra’s sun from him, as well as keeping him away from Runeterra while forcing him to do their bidding.
-  Some of the mortal civilizations have the idea to unify as a singular force: The Shuriman Empire. The religious peoples of Targon are given guidance by the Aspects to this end, while Ixtal serves as one of its principal founders.
- With the help of Targon they begin constructing a prototype of an artifact known as the [[league of lore/world locations/Sun Disc\|league of lore/world locations/Sun Disc]] above the city of [[Nerimazeth.\|Nerimazeth.]]
- The story “Twin Dawns” happens.
-  While the prototype [[league of lore/world locations/Sun Disc\|league of lore/world locations/Sun Disc]] is being built Pantheon, with a human female host, calls Aurelion Sol to Runeterra to deal with an incursion of [[Voidborn\|Voidborn]]. He does, obliterating the rift creating them and Pantheon’s mortal host. In retribution the Aspects kill a star in the Celestial Realm.